First draft to document portable format for 64b implementations (#12)
RoaringBitmap/RoaringFormatSpec: README.md

## Unsigned integers in Java

Java lacks native unsigned integers, but integers are still considered to be unsigned within Roaring, and ordered  according to  ``Integer.compareUnsigned``. 

For integers in [0,2147483647], the unsigned and signed integers are undistinguisable since Java relies a 32-bit two's complement format for its ``int`` type.

# Extention for 64B implementations

> Some Roaring bitmap implementations may offer a 64-bits implementation. This section proposes a portable format, compatible with some (but not all) 

Reviewer: We should specify what the range of values are. For 64-bit integers, there are two possibilities... `[-9223372036854775808, 9223372036854775807]` or `[0,18446744073709551616)`.

Author: Roaring64NavigableMap enables both modes, but CRoaring targets only unsigned longs.

Author: We may serialization following the format, but it would lead to unexpected results if read from another implementation. Also, the portable format does not add a hint for this option (signed vs unsigned) (while legacy Roaring64NavigableMap serialization format included a boolean to indicate if it handles signed or unsigned longs).

Reviewer: When we write out/read the data, do we require that the keys be in increasing order? If so, we must specify the order.

Author: Regarding CRoaring: I do not get why we serialize the number of buckets as uint64 instead of uint32. Java legacy serialization format was serializing as uint32 (and its current implementation would not handle a long > `2^32`).

Is it a bug in the design, or is there a real motivation @lemire ?

Reviewer: > Is it a bug in the design, or is there a real motivation @lemire ?

I did not design any of these serialization formats. They have grown organically through various contributions. As far as I am concerned, we are even allow to change them. Nobody should rely on an undocumented format for long-term storage.

It is only when we start to ask that the formats be supported and interoperable that we need to think seriously about what we are doing.

Regarding the gap you have identified. Nobody care about the waste of two bytes. In fact, having two zero bytes in the specification is not bad. It can be used to detect mistakes (the input is not really what you think it is).

We may even use these two bytes later for other purposes.

> 64-bits implementations. This format is naturally compatible with implementations base on a conventional

Reviewer: based on ?

Author: You refer to `naturally compatible ` ? Because the serialization format follows the in-memory layout (hence why CRoaring and Java chose this format from the beginning).

Reviewer: I would write "This format is naturally compatible with implementations *based* on a conventional" and not "This format is naturally compatible with implementations *base* on a conventional".

red-black-tree. The keys would be 32-bit integers representing the most significant 32~bits of elements whereas the values of the tree are 32-bit Roaring 

> bitmaps. The 32-bit Roaring bitmaps represent the least significant bits of a set of elements.

Reviewer: For 63-bit numbers in `[0, 9223372036854775807]`, there is no ambiguity. But there is in general.

Author: Unclear to me what is expected from myself on this feedback.

Reviewer: None. I am just stressing that if the keys have to be in order, then we have to worry about whether it is unsigned or signed order. This wasn't a remark I expected you to answer specifically.

Author: Go expects strict ordering of buckets (https://github.com/RoaringBitmap/roaring/blob/master/roaring64/roaring64.go#L114).
C seems to handle mis-ordering (https://github.com/RoaringBitmap/CRoaring/blob/master/cpp/roaring64map.hh#L1097)
Java handle mis-ordering (https://github.com/RoaringBitmap/RoaringBitmap/blob/master/RoaringBitmap/src/main/java/org/roaringbitmap/longlong/Roaring64NavigableMap.java#L1233).

But ordering would simplify/enable memory-mapping.

## General layout

All words are written using little endian encoding.

> ~The layout is designed so that random access to the data is possible without materializing the bitmap in memory while being storage efficient.~

Reviewer: I would probably leave this out for now as it does not help the reader that much.

Author: Removed.

(This may be true, but no implementation demonstrates this yet.)

> - Write as long/uint64 the number of buckets (a.k.a the number of distinct keys being the most significant 32~bits of elements)

Reviewer: So this number is between 0 and 2**32 (inclusively), correct?

Author: `0` and `2**32 - 1`, yes

Reviewer: Sorry, right 2**32-1. So even though we use a 64-bit number, we are really writing a 32-bit number. It is important here to specify the range: it is in `[0,4294967295]`. So we always pad with two zero bytes (to  make a 64-bit integer). Correct?

Author: It is true with my Java perspective. But I suspect there might be a good reason from CRoaring perspective. Do you have somebody from CRoaring to contribute on this review?

> So we always pad with two zero bytes (to make a 64-bit integer). Correct?

Correct, but I might be missing something.

## Unsigned integers in Java

Java lacks native unsigned integers, but integers are still considered to be unsigned within Roaring, and ordered  according to  ``Integer.compareUnsigned``. 

For integers in [0,2147483647], the unsigned and signed integers are undistinguisable since Java relies a 32-bit two's complement format for its ``int`` type.

> # Extention for 64B implementations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Extention for 64-bit implementations
```
Since we write it like this everywhere else.

Author: Done

> Some Roaring bitmap implementations may offer a 64-bits implementation. This section proposes a portable format, compatible with some (but not all) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some Roaring bitmap implementations may offer a 64-bit implementation. This section proposes a portable format, compatible with some (but not all) 
```

Author: Done

> 64-bits implementations. This format is naturally compatible with implementations based on a conventional red-black-tree (as the serialization format 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
64-bit implementations. This format is naturally compatible with implementations based on a conventional red-black-tree (as the serialization format 
```

Author: Done

is similar to the in-memory layout). The keys would be 32-bit integers representing the most significant 32~bits of elements whereas the values of the 
tree are 32-bit Roaring bitmaps. The 32-bit Roaring bitmaps represent the least significant bits of a set of elements.

## General layout

All words are written using little endian encoding.

> - Write as long/uint64 the distinct number of buckets (restricted to integers in [0,4294967295]) (a.k.a the number of distinct keys being the most significant 32~bits of elements, leading to a two zero bytes padding).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Write as ``long``/``uint64`` the distinct number of buckets (restricted to integers in [0,4294967295]) (a.k.a the number of distinct keys being the most significant 32~bits of elements, leading to a two zero bytes padding).
```
Why is storing a 32-bit number in a ``uint64`` 2 bytes of padding and not 4, and why are we doing it at all instead of just storing 4 bytes here?

Author: > why are we doing it at all instead of just storing 4 bytes here?

This has been discussed in https://github.com/RoaringBitmap/RoaringFormatSpec/pull/12#pullrequestreview-1179395091. The only strong reason is that CRoaring has seemingly a greater stock of serialized 64-bit Roaring bitmaps, then I felt preferable converging to their format.

> Why is storing a 32-bit number in a uint64 2 bytes of padding and not 4

I did not process the suggestion this was inducing a 2 bytes padding, but you are right this format induces a 4 bytes padding.

---

I would be keen discussing this with a CRoaring 64-bit implementation author to get if there is a real motivation or not.

if there is no real motivation, do we want to stick to CRoaring format, or produce yet another one ? Any way, I feel this format is improvable feature-wise a it does not enable trivial memory-mapping (as this would require writing ahead the (cumulative?) length of each bucket).

Reviewer 2: Well, since it seems the current format is already established in some way by CRoaring, I suppose we gotta enshrine this one for now, and if we want a memory mappable one later, we define a new format.

- Iterate through buckets ordered by increasing keys (as unsigned integers), for each: 

> - first writing as int/uint32 the most significant 32~bits of the bucket (in [0,2^32-1])

Reviewer 2: If we want this memory-mappable, should we store all the keys first together with the offset into the serialised data where their bitmap starts, so that one can basically just read the header and then pick up one particular bitmap by scanning from the offset?

Author: (processing comments one at a time).
Yes ! I suggest keeping this feature for a next iteration (as here, I'm mainly targetting portability between C, Go and Java).

The 4 bytes padding may be used for some sort of versioning (or serialization-format picking), as anyway, it may not be reachable to have an optimal format for both Map-based and ART-based 64-bit implementations.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that makes sense. The format we use in Delta has a "magic number" in that slot, which we use to identify the actual format used to serialise the data.

- second writing the 32-bit Roaring bitmaps representing the least significant bits of a set of elements

## Unsigned longs in Java

Java lacks native unsigned longs, but longs are still considered to be unsigned within Roaring, and ordered according to ``Long.compareUnsigned``. 

> For long in [0,18446744073709551616], the unsigned and signed longs are undistinguisable since Java relies a 64-bit two's complement format for its ``long`` type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For ``long`` in [0,18446744073709551616], the unsigned and signed longs are indistinguishable since Java relies a 64-bit two's complement format for its ``long`` type.
```

Author: Reworded

> ## Alternative 64-bits implementation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Alternative 64-bit implementations
```

Author: Done

> ## Alternative 64-bits implementation

Reviewer 2: Maybe add links to the specific implementations mentioned in this section?

Author: Done

> Java Roaring bitmaps implementation offers an ART-based 64-bits implementation. It may reach better performances (compression and/or computation). But

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Java Roaring bitmaps implementation offers an ART-based 64-bit implementation. It may reach better performances (compression and/or computation). But
```

Author: Done

> as of 2022-11, it is not compatible with this Serialization format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as of 2022-11, it is not compatible with this serialization format.
```

Author: Done

> Java Roaring bitmaps implementation offers an Map-based 64-bits implementation handling signed longs. It is not compatible with this Serialization format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Java Roaring bitmaps implementation offers a ``Map``-based 64-bit implementation handling signed longs. It is not compatible with this serialization format.
```

Author: Done. The rendering link + code is a bit weird.

bitmaps. The 32-bit Roaring bitmaps represent the least significant bits of a set of elements.

## General layout

All words are written using little endian encoding.

- Write as long/uint64 the distinct number of buckets (in [0,2^64-1]) (a.k.a the number of distinct keys being the most significant 32~bits of elements)
- Iterate through buckets ordered by increasing bucket by: 
- first writing as int/uint32 the most significant 32~bits of the bucket (in [0,2^32-1])
- second writing the 32-bit Roaring bitmaps representing the least significant bits of a set of elements

## Unsigned longs in Java

Java lacks native unsigned longs, but longs are still considered to be unsigned within Roaring, and ordered  according to  ``Long.compareUnsigned``. 

For long in [0,18446744073709551616], the unsigned and signed longs are undistinguisable since Java relies a 64-bit two's complement format for its ``long`` type.

## Alternative 64-bits implementation

Java Roaring bitmaps implementation offers an ART-based 64-bits implementation. It may reach better performances (compression and/or computation). But
as of 2022-11, it is not compatible with this Serialization format.

> Java Roaring bitmaps implementation offers an Map-based 64-bits implementation hanling signed longs. It is not compatible with this Serialization format.

Reviewer: hanling->handling

Author: Fixed
